The Moss Report is brought to you by
Molife, makers of the world's best
mushroom extracts, including the Moss
Method mushroom formula, available
exclusively at microlife. us.
This podcast contains a number of
scientific terms. For your convenience,
we've included a glossery at the link in
the description or scan the QR code on
your screen. Hello healers. My name is
Ben and this is the Moss Report. I'm
here today with my father, author and
founder of the Moss Report, Dr. Ralph W.
Moss. And we're joined with our special
guest, Professor Thomas N. Safeed of
Boston College. And professor safeed is
the author of a book cancer as a
metabolic disease as well as the head of
the research department doing some of
the leading work on the whole subject of
cancer as a metabolic disease.
Gentlemen, thank you very much for being
with us. Professor Seed, good to see you
again. Thanks for joining us.
>> Well, thanks Ben. It's always great to
be back and uh with your dad, Ralph.
Always a pleasure.
>> Thank you. Thank you, Tom. Wonderful to
see you.
So I just want to sort of lay the
groundwork for our audience who may not
be familiar with this topic. The
conventional thinking around cancer and
its origin relates to what is known as
the somatic mutation theory which in
essence means that there is a mutation
inside of the cell that causes
uncontrolled growth and the theory that
is being put forth uh the metabolic and
mitochondrial theory as I understand
it's being now referred to is that the
origin of cancer actually stems from a
malfunction, if you will, of the
metabolic system of the cell. Would you
say that's a fair characterization?
>> Well, the metabolic uh system, of
course, is the mitochondrian. Um uh
there's now massive evidence presented
that all major cancers have some uh
defect in the number, structure, and
function of the mitochondria.
uh all of which creates an environment
uh where um mutations occur as a
downstream effect of the damage to the
regulation of energy metabolism. Anna
Warberg um was the first to discover the
origin of cancer as a mitochondrial
metabolic disease back in the 1920s and
30s. But certain new facts were not
available to him at that time and he
also made uh certain assumptions
uh that turned out to be incorrect. So
the the two key pieces of information
that derailed the entire cancer industry
or thrust to manage cancer uh was the
absence of certain critical uh
information and um misinterpretation of
the data that they they thought was
accurate. And as the result of that, the
entire cancer field ran off chasing
genes. Um, which is which is
underpinning much of the pharmaceutical
effort to manage cancer today. And many
of the drugs that are being developed
are based on the somatic mutation
theory, which is a no longer credible
theory. And that can account for why we
have um uh over uh 618,000
people a year dying in the United
States, which comes to about 1,700
people per day or 70 people per hour.
And this relentless death and suffering
continues year in and year out as the
result of focusing on a theory that is
no longer credible. Mhm. And Otto
Warberg whom you mentioned got the Nobel
Prize for this discovery. Uh it was that
important.
>> He got a Nobel Prize for his discovery
of the respiratory enzyme cytochrome C.
>> I see.
>> So he was nominated many times for his
work in cancer but never never received
it. And that was um a variety of
reasons. Hitler determined that Jews
should not get no or any German for that
matter. you know why was it as a Jew why
was he spared by Hitler Hitler feared
cancer uh as much as anyone did and
spared Warberg uh but Warberg was no fan
of Hitler u in fact Sam Apple's book uh
Ravenous goes into a lot of the details
on on this backstory of Warberg but he
understood cancer better than anyone at
that time as I said uh his failure to
recognize that there is a second
fermentable fuel which is glutamine um
and the mechanism for that which is
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation was not known to him and
we've clarified that and his assumption
that oxygen consumption was an accurate
marker for oxidative phosphorilation was
not correct and we've corrected that in
our two big new papers. So uh that that
sets uh a lot of the controversy and
misinformation and misunderstanding
arose from uh measurements that were not
accurate or information that was not
available at that time.
>> He attached himself to a sort of
simplistic view of cancer right uh Tom
that basically I mean he was very
dogmatic personality
>> and brilliant Albert St. Georgie told me
he was the most brilliant biochemist of
the 20th century, but he didn't have the
information you have.
>> I went back and our fact our new big
paper uh that just came out of the
journal of biommembranes and
bioenergetics
uh goes into the deep dive of of where
these mistakes were made. And Sydney
Winehouse at the time who was head of
the NIH and National Cancer Institute,
in fact, even today they're making the
same errors. They're assuming that
oxygen consumption is an accurate marker
for ATP production through oxidative
phosphorilation in cancer cells. Uh
which is wrong. And we we we showed
evidence. We and others have shown that
there's a disconnect. Cancer cells do
take in oxygen, but it's not used
predominantly for ATP. It's used to make
reactive oxygen species, uh which are
the radicals that cause the DNA damage
in the nucleus. So sort of the opposite
of the healthy use of oxygen.
>> Yes. And and and when Warberg uh
actually he relied on his former postto
Hans Krebs, another giant in the field
of biology, Hans Krebs and his group
clearly showed in rat liver uh uh slices
that each mole of oxygen consumed was
equal to seven moles of ATP produced. So
we should explain ATP being the packets
of energy that are normally produced
from a cell.
>> It's the biochemical
currency of energy adenosine
triphosphate
um because it drives all bioenergetic
processes and without energy nothing
nothing can survive. So you have to have
some source of energy uh always and and
and Warberg was saying that most of the
energy from cancer came from a
fermentation metabolism where glucose
would be fermented to lactic acid. And
um he could then estimate how much
energy was being produced in a cancer
cell by how much oxygen it consumed and
by how much lactic acid it produced. Uh
we have gone on and shown that none of
those measurements are accurate. um
their estimates um and he bet and I said
where did he get the idea that seven
moles of ATP could be produced from one
mole of oxygen consumed and it came from
his the work of of Hans Krebs uh and you
know Krebs is a giant in the field of
biochemistry. And so Warberg trained
Krebs and felt that Krebs could never be
mistaken because I trained him. And
Krebs was not mistaken when it came to
normal cells, but he was mistaken when
it came to tumor cells. And Warberg used
the same concept. He said, "Oh, uh, my
controls are, uh, kidney slices and
liver slices, and I monitor how much
oxygen they consume, and I estimate, you
know, a certain amount of ATP based on
each mole of oxygen producing seven
moles of ATP." And then he made slices
of tumor and he said, "See, they they
they they consume much less oxygen uh
and they produce a lot more lactic acid,
but he was still assuming each mole of
oxygen consumed by a tumor cell produced
seven moles of ATP even though it was
consuming less oxygen. And it was making
up for the deficit by fermenting lactic
acid uh to produce one mole of a of ATP.
So one mole of lactic acid produced
equals one mole of ATP. One mole of
oxygen consumed as seven moles of ATP.
And he was using those quantifications.
And Sydney Winehouse came along and
said, "Listen, some cancer cells consume
just as much oxygen as a tumor cell.
Therefore, tumor cells cannot have uh a
problem in oxidative phosphorilation."
and Warberg also had the same data but
he said he said but they the tumor cells
are still fermenting meaning their
mitochondria or something is abnormal.
Um what we have clearly shown in our own
research quantitatively
uh that oxygen consumption is not an
accurate marker for ATP production in
cancer cells. It is in normal cells but
not in a cancer cell. So that questions
now all of these uh ideas about um where
the where the cancer is getting its
energy. Not only that we have now with
uh our work and others uh that the
production of lactic acid is is also not
an accurate marker for how much ATP is
coming through the cytool the cytoplasm
um because they have different pyuvate
kinases which are the which is the
payoff phase of the glycolytic pathway
and in normal cells you have a pyuvate
kinase uh one pk
one pyuvate kinus
M1 isoform where you do get one mole of
ATP produced by one mole of lactic acid
produced but in cancer cells you have a
pKm2 which produces lactic acid without
producing ATP. So that that estimation
is wrong and we put that in the paper as
well. So it was the quantification of
where energy was coming from and the
amount of energy that confused the
entire cancer field for decades.
>> Yeah. uh and therefore everybody ran off
chasing genes. Um and and now you know
we've done so much research on that. Uh
the genes are absolutely impossible to
be driving cancer because we nuclear
mitochondrial transfer experiments rule
them out. Um uh so you have to look at
the data on all aspects and and what
we've discovered that Warberg did not
know about uh nor nor do most people
because they don't read the literature
is that we have shown that the amino
acid glutamine which the field thought
was respired
um
>> meaning
>> meaning that it was that glutamine
respiration you need uh glutamine was
driving energy through oxidative
phosphorilation based on energy
consumption. Well, we have shown that
the the oxy oxygen consumption is no
longer an accurate marker. So, we took
away all oxygen and we took away all
glucose. So, we didn't get the
interference from either oxfos
or or fermentation in the cytoplasm. use
glutamine alone as a fuel in the absence
of oxygen and in the presence of cyanide
which completely shuts down oxidative
phosphorilation
>> and we see continued energy production
ATP. Well, where the hell is the ATP
coming from if there's no glucose and
there's no oxygen?
So we t we teamed up with uh Christo
Shinopoulos the world expert on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation which is a fermentation
mechanism inside the mitochondrian
itself. So this organel can not only get
energy through oxidation respiration but
also fermentation. This is an
evolutionarily conserved that organi
that organel is an organism that has
certain capabilities.
That's its biological its evolutionary
origin, right? Is probably that the
mitochondrian was incorporated
into a se into a bacterial cell
>> which essentially created the the normal
ukareotic cell. That's the best theory
at least.
>> Yeah. No, that's the that's the the
standard theory.
>> That's the recognized explanation.
>> Yeah. But but the issue you have to
realize that that organel
uh not only directs the entire energy
metabolism inside the cell um um from
from uh oxidative phosphorilation which
is a highly efficient process but also
it can ferment
>> and that or and that fuel for
fermentation is not sugar it's the amino
acid glutamine. So we were show and then
people knew for years that cancer cells
have glutamine addiction. They just
didn't know the mechanism by which the
glutamine was driving the disregulated
growth and and we now show it's a
fermentation metabolism inside the
mitochondrian itself. So in order to
manage cancer and we tested we
interrogated all other fuels to see what
is there anything that could replace
glutamine as an alternative fuel and
none of them can do it. No other am none
of the other 20 amino acids. Asparagene
a little bit glutamate of course but the
transporters for these are mi minor and
the amounts of these fuels in the micro
environment are minor. So if you want to
drive a raging beast you have to have a
very high high throughput process and
and the other amino acids are not there
in any level that would drive the beast.
So glutamine is there in massive amounts
because it's the most abundant amino
acid in our body. So it already has uh
all of this available and plenty of
sugar, plenty of glutamine uh and you
have a fermentation metabolism in the
cytoplasm and in the mitochondria. And
we have shown the exhaust uh system.
Don't forget when you when you breathe
energy like we are doing now in our
conversation. Every every breath I bring
in I bring in air uh air which has
oxygen and I exhale CO2 and water. Those
are the waste products of normal
respiration. The cancer cells uh waste
products are lactic acid and suinic
acid. Suxinic acid is the waste product
of glutamine fermentation.
>> So, and that and all cancer cells are
blowing out suinic acid like there's no
tomorrow. So, you know, they're
fermenting glutamine. If you target
glucose alone, the cancer cells will
upregulate uh glutamine metabolism. And
if you target glutamine metabolism, they
upregulate glucose metabolism. So, the
way you manage cancer is you must target
both of those together simultaneously
while transitioning the body over to
nutritional ketosis because the tumor
cells can't burn ketones or fatty acids
because you need a good strong
mitochondria, healthy mitochondria to do
that. And no cancer cell has a normal
content or composition or function of
mitochondria. So, the ketones keep the
rest of our body healthy. Our normal
cells, non-turogenic cells, uh pick up
fatty acids and ketones. Cancer cells
are not able to do that. Therefore, they
become marginalized and die when you
take away their glucose and glutamine.
The the interesting thing is we have all
the science to support this. We've done
all the experiments. We have all the
science and evidence to support this in
both pre-clinical studies as well as
some clinical studies and almost nobody
knows about it. Uh and there's not a
single clinical trial anywhere in the
world doing what I just told you to do.
And when you try and if you did that you
would be ma able to manage cancer
without toxicity for the majority of
people. Um you just get a low glucose
ketone index and we found out these
parasite drugs like mendazol fenbendazol
they not only target the glycolysis
pathway they target the glutaminolysis
pathway. So when you do that under
nutritional ketosis these simple cheap
ass parasite drugs you know why the
parasites and the cancer cells are using
the same mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation.
not not complicated at all. Um and and
it works it works really really well. Uh
not perfected yet, but it certainly
shows tremendous hope without toxicity.
So um I mean what's wrong with this?
It's just and it's not that it's so
simple, but it's not nearly as
complicated as people made it out to be.
How is it that this eluded you when you
wrote cancer as a metabolic disease?
this latest finding. I mean, it seems
like so obvious now that you the way you
state it,
>> I I speculated on it in chapter eight of
my book. It was a chapter of speculation
>> and uh I took the word the um from the
Dr. Hokashka who has since passed away
when he was talking about animals uh
that are held in hypox like they were
like seals and porpuses and things. He
held them underwater and uh because they
naturally could hold be underwater, but
you can't do those experiments today. He
was doing them in Hawaii and he was
measuring lactic acid and suinic acid in
the bloodstream of these animals that
were held underwater and he was finding
a tremendous amount of suinic acid
increased in the bloodstream along with
lactic acid. He predicted based on his
biochemical measurements that there was
a amino acid fermentation that was going
on
>> to keep these animals alive. The problem
is he never speculated on what was the
amino acid that was responsible for
this. Uh and we now have shown that it's
glutamine. Um and and when we did a
deeper dive on this and the heart attack
people in the cardiovascular have have
known about this for decades, it's just
that the cancer world and the
cardiovascular world don't overlap. So
when people have heart attacks, their
bloodstream fills up with lactic acid
and suinic acid because when you die
from a heart attack, it's neurons that
die. Uh neurons and cardiomyiocytes
which rarely if ever become cancer
cannot shift to a fermentation
metabolism for very long. So they can do
it for a short period of time, a giant
burst of fermentation because because if
you don't, you're going to be dead. And
you see a massive amount of suinic acid
and lactic acid build up in the
bloodstream of a person under a heart
attack because they're not breathing.
And and uh what they're doing is they're
fermenting glucose and glutamine and the
waste products are lactic acid and and
suinic acid. And cancer cells are doing
that even in the presence of oxygen,
100% oxygen. They're throwing out those
two fermentable fuels. Warberg always
said that was the unique thing about
cancer. They continue to ferment in the
presence of oxygen and uh and he was
only looking at the lactic acid part of
it. He wasn't looking at the glutamine
uh producing suinic acid part. The
cardio field provided us with the direct
evidence for that. And then when we did
our experiments, we designed a novel
series of experiments to exclude oxfos
and exclude glycolysis as the
explanation. And we still got ATP in the
absence of oxygen. Uh, and it was coming
from the fermentation of glutamine
because we labeled the glutamine in in a
in a a C13 labeled glutamine and we got
C13 labeled suinic acid knowing exactly
where it was coming from. And and when
we targeted the glutamonolysis pathway,
we killed the cells instantly. So
>> you sort of uh clinch the argument
there, right? Yeah. I mean because you
have radio when you say labeled you mean
you made it radioactive, right?
>> Yeah. Well, we use we use Yeah. radio
lababeled. Uh well, we can pick it up by
mass spectrometry.
>> Uh we can know where the where the
labels. So, we add a labeled glutamine
and then we look for the waste product
and we found label suction in the same
carbon. So, so you know where it came
from. Um and that's what cancer cells
are doing. They're dumping out acidic
products that have carbon hydrogen
bonds. So this is why you have to
wasting the sun's energy. See oxidative
phosphorilation is so energetically
efficient. Every carbon hydrogen bond is
broken down and the energy of the sun is
captured in the carbon hydrogen bonds.
So if you're dumping lactic acid and
suinic acid which have carbon hydrogen
bonds, this is not an efficient me. This
is a this is a primitive fermentation
mechanism that existed before oxygen
came into the atmosphere 2 and a half
billion years ago. So these cancer cells
are doing nothing more than falling back
on these ancient fermentation pathways.
And you have to have high throughput
because in order to make up the loss of
efficient oxidative phosphorilation, you
better have a tremendous logistical
supply of the fermentation fuels. That's
uh uh glucose and and glutamine are the
are the originating fuels for
carbohydrate fermentation, sugar
fermentation and amino acid
fermentation.
>> Glucose is also the fuel for metabolism
in the presence of oxygen.
>> Yeah. a what you called oxfos oxidative
phosphorilation.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Because the pyuvate is
then metabolized to acetil coa and you
produce reducing equivalents. You're
breaking down all of that in the TCA
cycle delivering the reducing
equivalents to the electron transport
chain producing a very proton motive
gradient and generating highly efficient
energy with water and CO2 as your waste
products. CO2 coming out of the TCA
cycle and water being produced as the
product through the F1 F-Zero ATPAS.
highly highly efficient mechanism. If
that mechanism doesn't work well, you
have to fall back on an ancient
fermentation pathway. And that's what
Warberg said. All cancers all can it's a
two-step process. It's a a a chronic
damage or disruption of efficient
oxidative phosphorilation that is
coupled to a compensatory substrate
level which we call it fermentation
which it was now substrate level
phosphorilation which happens in the
cyto cytoplasm in the 10step Mdenhof
pathway or in the mitochondria which
nobody knew about which is a
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation but in chapter eight of
my book I speculated but then I reached
reached out since that time to Christo
Shinopoulos at Seml Weiss University who
is the world leader on understanding
substrate level phosphor
>> in Budapest
>> in Budapest and and and he he looked at
my diagram he says no no no that's not
right so um but he said your idea is
really exciting but he said the pathway
you have is not right so we then over
the last uh you know 15 years uh
designed experiments to get to the right
pathway and and then figuring it out.
And now we have and we published it in
ASN Neuro which has now got the most
views of any of any article ever
published in that in that journal.
>> Um uh and they still scratch their
heads. They don't they still have no
clue. When I say they, I think it's the
cancer establishment.
>> They they never heard of like what I'm
talking about. Substrate level
phosphorilation in the mitochondria.
What the hell is that?
>> What does that have to do with cancer?
Yeah, everything.
It's the missing link in Warberg's
central theory. Warberg was correct. He
just didn't have the right all the stuff
put together. So, we can take the whole
cancer field and put it back on the
right track. But ironically though,
you're also sort of confirming
uh Sydney Winehouse and his other and
Wahberg's other opponents because in
effect their criticism was a correct one
if I'm understanding you. I mean,
>> well, they didn't believe Warberg's
explanation for it.
They Winehouse was saying see if I if
cancer cells consume oxygen at the same
rate as normal cells. How could you how
could you say in any way that they have
a problem in oxidative phosphorilation?
So they must use fermentation as like a
turbocharge. They need so much energy
they need both oxfos and fermentation
together. So um uh but I I showed that's
not correct because the cancer cell does
consume oxygen but it's not but it's not
producing very much. It does produce
some uh but it's neither necessary nor
sufficient for the disregulated cell
growth. So the yeah so cancer cells can
get energy from three sources. The
cytoplasm through the Mden Meyerhoff
prawns pathway which is the uh producing
ATP uh at the payoff phase of the
glycolytic pathway. That's true that but
we don't we can't know for sure how much
but they do get some energy a lot of
energy from there but we don't know
exactly how much. Yes they can get some
energy from oxfos but it's neither
necessary nor sufficient in the absence
of a fermentation metabolism. And yes
they get energy through the mitochondria
from fermenting glutamine. So it's
glutamine to glutamate to alpha
ketoglutarate in the TCA cycle to suenil
coa and then the suxenate leaves the TCA
cycle and is dumped out into the
cytoplasm and and um into the outside
the cell. So and that creates the
acidification. When people say oh we
can't kill cancer cells with radiation
and chemo and imunotherapies because
their micro environment is so acidified.
Well, that's the crap products of the
fermentation metabolism that acidifies.
So, if you take away glucose and
glutamine, you remove the acidification
of the micro environment now making
these cancer cells super vulnerable to
all these uh standards of care that
people are you don't have to use such
high dosages. You don't have to be your
radiating and poisoning people with the
same level of of toxicity. You can use
those same uh procedures at much much
lower dosages and timing because the
cancer cells will now be super
vulnerable. They're hanging on barely to
survival without their two fermentable
fuels. And now you just come in and push
them over the edge with the standards of
care that you have. And then that that
will allow cancer patients to uh
eliminate their cancer far more
effectively with minimal tox local uh
collateral damage. What's wrong with
that?
I don't see anything wrong with this
strategy. It's hard science that
supports everything that I'm saying.
Well, the last time we we spoke
um Fen Fen and Ben uh uh the these
antiparasitical
drugs were not on the uh radar if I
remember correctly.
>> So, that's something new and uh they're
very controversial uh because of people
advocating them for COVID and other
things. Yeah. Um but also uh Ivormectin
appeared on the scene and Ivormectin is
also if I'm not mistaken
antiparasitical.
>> So there seem to seems to be a sort of a
a trend here. You know it seems like
maybe that's a a
>> because I think when we when we last
spoke uh Tom the big hangup was for me
but and also many other people was that
it was fairly straightforward. It seemed
fairly straightforward to reduce your
glucose. A person can do that at home.
And you you've invented a way for them
to uh measure how much glucose they have
visav ketones, these the glucose ketone
index, right?
>> And um and so that seemed
straightforward. What seemed much less
straightforward was how do you control
the the flow of glutamine being the the
most abundant free amino acid in the
body? And also since it's not an
essential amino acid, you can make it
from other amino acids. How do you how
do you really get a handle on that? And
now you seem to have indicated that this
venazol and mebendazol
which have been advocated just
empirically over the years by that
clinic in in London and uh and others as
a way of controlling that. Do you feel
confident in that as a as a mechanism or
are you still looking for something more
of a knockout punch?
>> Well, I think that's um they're not as
not as powerful as uh 60 oxy lucine,
which is Dawn.
>> Yeah,
>> Don is the mo is the big big stick on
this whole thing. Mhm.
>> Uh we published a paper in 2019 using a
calorierestricted ketogenic diet with
lowd do
>> for um brain cancer. And uh we it was
really remarkable how powerful it is.
And what we did is we showed that uh
under ketosis
um you can deliver Dawn through the
bloodb brain barrier three times more
effectively uh which is really powerful
>> and and with embendazol and fenbendazol
people recommend taking those drugs with
a fat diet which means that basically
it's a ketogenic so you're facilitating
the delivery of that but in our paper
that we have under review right we put
it out in bioarchchives it was the first
evidence that uh mbendazol is targeting
the glutaminolysis pathway. Um people
people say that it targets microtubule
assembly. Um but but but there's a
terrible toxic vincine I think is the
chemo drug that targets microtubules.
>> Taxol too I think.
>> Yeah. And they're very very toxic drugs.
>> Uh and bendazol is extremely non-toxic.
People take it to kill parasites and
it's very little toxicity.
>> And yet and yet it's very powerful
against cancer. Um and and you know
microtubial assembly requires ATP. Uh
and if you're blocking ATP then you
ain't going to get microtubial assembly.
>> Yeah.
>> So uh everything comes back to energy.
So if we can so the the the field was
led down a path thinking that embendol
was working and it through microtubular
assembly but it might do that but it's
working more by targeting glycolysis and
glutaminolysis pathways.
>> Yeah.
>> And most of that work was done in China
in India because in they have big
parasite problems. So they they showed
that um uh embendazol block glucose
transporters. So that would uh that
would facilitate uh shutting down
glucose and we're the first ones to show
that it reduces the activity of
glutaminase, one of the top uh the
enzymes that breaks uh glutamine down to
glutamate. So that would put some uh
pressure on the glutamolysis pathway.
And then we realized when I did a dive
on the parasites, they used
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorilation just like cancer cells
do. Mhm.
>> So, uh, and you're right, Ralph, I I
when I started this, the the political
firestorm about Ivormectin was out of
control and and and I didn't want to do
anything with Ivormectin because
whatever I found would be contra would
would be yelling and screaming about it,
>> right? We went into Mbendazol uh which
is an alternative but I I I have not
looked at ivormectin and if ivormectin
targets glucose and glutamine then it
can explain why it's so powerful um as a
therapeutic but again they they don't
work um by themselves. You you really
need to uh put the patient in
nutritional ketosis first and then you
come in with the parasite medications or
dawn. uh but that's why I developed the
press pulse therapeutic strategy for the
effective management of cancer in people
uh because we pulse glutamine targeting
drugs because if you are too aggressive
you can harm your gut and immune system
and that's why we pulse these drugs. So
the patient must first get into
nutritional ketosis using the glucose
ketone index calculator.
>> Yeah. uh so once you're in low GKI then
you can come in with uh various parasite
medications uh which will then uh target
these tumor cells and we also showed
that this drug CPI 613
which uh targets pathway in the TCA
cycle it was very toxic when given to
humans in pancreat pancreatic cancer uh
very toxic and we gave it to the mice
the same way too terribly toxic and then
when we administered it with the
ketogenic diet
uh uh it became far far less toxic. So
clearly we're able to rescue certain
drugs that were considered unusable in
the clinic. We think we can resurrect a
lot of these cancer drugs by just simply
putting patients into nutritional
ketosis and then strategically pulsing
these drugs using low dosages. Dosage
timing and scheduling have to be worked
out to maximize the therapeutic efficacy
of each drug. But they will all work
really well when the patient is in
nutritional ketosis uh dictated by the
number generated from the glucose ketone
index. So, so we we have a strategy, a
plan that once adapted and uh it will
drop cancer death rates massively and
and and keep people alive with a higher
quality of life much much longer than
would be have predicted. So, we're all
at the very beginning of this. The
science is solid. uh the practical
application of this in the clinic sees
needs to be worked out and improved for
sure. But but all all the parts of the
puzzle are there. We know what to do. We
think we know how to do it. We try it on
small case reports clinical not big ones
because nobody knows how to do this. You
if you take a hundred patients and try
to get him as hurting cats, everybody
has to be a little different than the
other guy and yeah, how do you know all
this? So, we do it on small groups of
people to learn uh what we need to do
and how to do it and the ones that are
most successful, what did they do and
how did they do it relative to those
guys that aren't so successful. And then
we keep logging this and logging it and
putting it into apps and things like
this so that when we go and do a larger
clinical trial uh we'll be able to uh
identify the variables that need to be
uh regulated for each person whether
what their age is what their sex is um
dietary issues all these kinds of things
have to be corrected or analyzed or
adjusted depending on the situation. So
we can't run in and do oh where are your
big clinical trials? Well, who the hell
is going to do a big clinical trial when
you have no clue what the hell we're
doing? So, you have to have some
knowledge base. You have to have some
experience. And once that experience and
knowledge base comes to pass and we
develop these tools and ways to do it,
that's that's the the major breakthrough
in this whole cancer thing, you're going
to start seeing people live far longer
with a higher quality of life. There's
no question because the science tells us
that we have interrogated the we know
what to do uh and basically how to do
it. We just need to get the practical
application in the clinic. And we just
started a new society of of uh
international society of metabolic
oncology where where we're gaining uh in
interest by oncologists throughout the
world who are are chomping at the bit to
treat their patients using these uh
procedures because uh they know that it
will be work. And a lot of them have
seen it in small groups of people that
wow, how can you be pulling people out
of hospice uh with with just changing
their their diet, putting them into
nutritional ketosis and giving them a
parasite medication? What the hell is
going on with that?
>> But also, it isn't, you know, it isn't
quite so simple to get somebody into
ketosis and then keep them there over a
long prolonged period of time. I speak
from personal experience that you know
it gets there are difficulties lifestyle
difficulties so it it makes perfect
sense as far as I'm concerned in terms
of the science of it but the it's a good
idea to go a little slow
>> at first um and then you have to educate
the educators you have to educate the
the people who are going to help the you
know the guides who are going to help
the people get and stay in in ketosis
And it's
>> well that's well that's that's one of
the challenges and our Greek colleagues
who who had really remarkable results on
glyobblasto just came out this year um
>> a very a very tough kind of brain cancer
prevention
>> very bad but the ones that stuck to the
calorierestricted Mediterranean diet uh
uh lived three years or longer were
those that didn't only one person
survived that long so so and what they
did was they had what did they do uh
they ate salmon, sardines, uh avocados,
and olive oil. I mean, this doesn't
sound like prohibitively difficult to
do. And and we're learning now you can
switch to carnivores. There there's a
lot of flexibility in in keeping uh your
GKI down without too much uh uh
emphasis. Vegans seem to have a lot of
trouble uh getting down, but they can,
but but it's more challenging for them.
uh but people who are omnivoric and they
can go to calorierest restricted uh and
then the exercise is unbelievable
>> even if people they say oh you know I'm
GKI I've been done everything five I'm
five uh I can't get down to your two
level um um I'm doing this and I'm doing
that I said go out and walk out and run
four four or five miles a day all of a
sudden they're down in the zone
>> because your muscle activity is sucking
the glucose out of the bloodstream
giving you a lower GKI
>> and uh and then And then you start with
the the carnivore and the salmon and the
olive oil and all this kind of stuff.
It's not perfectly easy. Okay, you're
not eating jellyfilled donuts and you're
not going to the rice and bread and all
this kind of stuff.
>> If that's if that's what you consider uh
the greatest challenge in this um uh
then you will never you'll never achieve
the goal of of managing your cancer
>> effectively. you know, correct me if I'm
wrong, but the body does store a
tremendous supply of glutamine that it
can tap into that can sort of be
accessed over a period of weeks and
months. So, even if you cut off your
immediate simple sugar intake, you still
got fuel for the cancer.
>> Yeah. Well, that's why you need the
drugs. That's why you need the parasite
medications and dawn. That's why you
need specific drugs to target the
glutamine. That's why you you're right.
You can't There's no diet that will
lower glutamine no matter what you do.
Right.
>> Uh uh Cahill and his group down here at
the Joslyn Diabetes Center were able to
show that the only thing that lowered
glutamine was massive exercise and and
it never lowered it to the level that
would kill tumor cells. The t the level
we have is so much above the threshold
for survival for a tumor cell. The the
availability of the glutamine. uh that's
why you need drug specific drugs to
target that glutaminolysis pathway. But
that's where the knowledge base has to
come in. You need to know dosage timing
and scheduling for those drugs so you
don't harm uh and damage the gut or the
immune system of the patient. So, are
you saying that even if you went on a
low carb diet, keto diet, and were in
ketosis and kept it there for a few
months, let's say, that even that's not
really going to significantly lower the
glutamine levels uh available in the
body to the point where you're actively
able to sort of starve the cancer of the
glutamine that it's looking for.
>> Uh for some people that's true. uh for
other people it's not because we're
seeing people just getting into really
low GKI values and and no evidence of
disease which which to me is like well
what the hell where what what why are
they not using the glutamine um and then
we see other people who do get into low
GKI and the cancer continues to be
persistent um but we've never targeted
the glutamine in our preclinical systems
uh when we target the two together is is
when you really get the power and and
and with the mice are not always dying
from cancer, they're dying from the
adverse effects of long-term targeting
of glutamine. Uh so that's why we need
to learn how to pulse the glutamine.
That's going to be the clinical uh
contribution to this whole thing. Pe
people are going to know what age you
are, what sex you are, uh what's your
cultural background, what what's your
religion, what all these kinds of things
have to come into how you're going to be
pulsing the glutamine problem. Um but
but we know what we need to do. It's
perfecting the strategy for doing it.
Um,
which is now uh clearly achievable. Um,
if you think cancer is a genetic
disease, none of what I'm talking about
is achievable. So, um, there by the
grace of God, you survive one of these
toxic things. And then if you do survive
uh using standards of care the way we
have it today, you often suffer from
lifelong health uh issues as the result
of your body being brutalized uh either
surgically mutilated or poisoned or
irradiated that you're never rarely
rarely not never rarely ever the healthy
you were before you started all of this
stuff. But with metabolic therapy, not
only can you manage the cancer, but you
can achieve a new level of health status
that you never had before. Because once
you start burning ketones, it's a super
fuel. We evolved to burn ketones. Uh we
didn't have uh as my friend, late friend
Bud Vich would say, we didn't have
delicateessins on every corner during
the Paleolithic period. Put us at risk
for all the all the problems that we
have today. So, we're just throwing
people back into a more paleolithic uh
diet and lifestyle and then coming in
strategically with drugs that will
target the very difficult part of the of
the glutaminolysis pathway. We have not
yet found any tumor that can survive for
very long without glucose and glutamine.
So, clearly there's nothing else that
can replace these two fuels. Uh and
they're not available in the environment
in bund in abundant enough levels. Um
glutamine is the only amino acid where
no energy is invested to get energy.
>> So it's gold that all other amino acids
>> uh have to be reconfigured to get to
alpha ketoglutarate in the TCA cycles.
There's an energy utilization to get uh
energy from the molecule. So it's kind
of a some game you you're use energy to
get energy. you don't you don't really
benefit where whereas glutamine is pure
energy and also it delivers the nitrogen
needed for DNA and RNA synthesis and uh
amino acid synthesis the nitrogen is
coming from the glutamine as as well as
the energy uh whereas the metabolites
for fatty acids and all others are
coming from the carbons and glucose. So
you got the carbons of glucose, the
carbons in nitrogen and glutamine and
the and we showed in our paper the
powerful synergy of the overlapping
metabolic pathways of these two fuels
driving the disregulated cell growth.
Incredible. It's absolutely incredible.
The question that's going to be on many
people's mind is the disconnect between
the logic of what you're presenting and
the factual nature of what you're saying
and the demonstrable nature of it after
so many years that you've put into this.
why this is still even unknown to the
vast majority of people in the field or
fasiley dismissed. So maybe you could
address that. That's what happens
whenever whenever you have a paradigm
shift
>> uh of this magnitude. You you get the
same the same uh response. Um
confirmation bias in the cancer field is
so powerful.
uh uh which is just it can't be right
because everybody's doing something
different. If you're right, how come
every 99% of people are doing uh and
they never actually look at the data uh
uh about that and dogmatic ideology is
unbelievable. It's like a religion. Um
uh it's very hard uh to convince
somebody uh to do something different
when their salary depends on them not
doing it.
That was upton Sinclair said that. And
if you and if you look at um Toltoy, I
have these quotes.
>> Uh it's easy to get somebody who who
doesn't have like a dog in the fight to
understand what you're doing, but it's
almost impossible to convince somebody
who is in the fight to change what they
think.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so you have these confirmation
biases. The National Cancer Institute on
their website says cancer is a genetic
disease. Hundred different diseases. Um,
and they award grants for people hunting
for these genes, the ever elusive cancer
gene. Um, and they and they keep doing
it over and over. If you're at a top
medical school and you need to justify
your existence, you need to get grants.
And those grants say cancer is a genetic
disease driven by mutations. So, you're
going to be hunting for mutations only
because the system tells you to do that.
And if you choose not to do that, you
you lose your job. So, uh, so you can
look at all you want. And but this is I
went back and I looked at the uh these
paradigm changes a and the heliocentric
geo geocentric is a really a really good
example for 1,800 years Aristotle and
Tami were arguing that the earth was the
center of the solar system and they kept
doing more equants epicycles and depence
and all these kinds of things and all
the mathematicians of the time the
astronomers were all trying to figure
out where these planets were. How could
you predict where one planet would be at
any time of the year? Uh, and the
movements of the celestial bodies and it
was a complete mess for 1,800 years. And
uh, Capernicus comes along and says,
"What happens if we replace the earth
with the sun?"
And of course, the Catholic Church went
nuts, you know, uh, and there was they
didn't accept that until like the 1800s,
>> right? that the uh the sun was the
center of the solar system and uh people
who challenged them were put in jail or
house look at Galileo house arrested and
then you have to look at the the the
difficulty um that Lewis Pastor had to
go through with his germ theory. Pastor
took a took a beating
>> um and so did Darwin Wallace on the
theory of evolution which still is under
attack all the time. So uh the the
mitochondrial metabolic theory replacing
the sematic mutation theory is the next
great paradigm shift in in in the field
of medicine. No question about it. And
and what we have found is it's not just
cancer. Uh the GKI can be effective in
managing all major chronic diseases. You
go up and down the list. Diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, dementia, these
things are all aspects of mitochondrial
dysfunction. uh cancer just happens to
be a capability where mitochondrial
dysfunction is compensated for by
substrate level phosphorilation where
some of these others are not compensated
and you get dead cells. So you can look
back and and see this whole thing this
is happening.
>> The mitochondrial metabolic theory will
replace the somatic mutation theory and
all other theories because it's the only
theory that it can account best for the
facts of the disease. Um it's just a
matter of time and and it's con uh
confirmation biasic ideology and your
and your paycheck that are pretty much
standing in the way of this
transformation. And people want it. It's
not like we're dragging cancer patients
kicking and screaming into this. They
want it. They they want to know they can
manage their disease without toxicity.
You know, I mean, it's a people's
choice. you're allowing an individual to
make decisions about their about their
destiny and there's power in that and
and uh people fear the the the surgical
mutilations and the toxicity of what
they have to go through as much as they
fear the disease and I and and that puts
the fear of God all this all this
emotional distress and I mean this is
not necessary uh uh when you look at
cancer as a a mitochondrial metabolic
disease um uh this is an opport
opportunity to retool to to recharge
your existence. Come out of this better
than you went into it. So, uh, and
because the it's there, we have it. It's
just that it has to be perfected. That's
all. We're in contact with people who
are doing this and they're feeding us
back massive information about what
they've experienced and how they're and
the doctors are always miffed. No
evidence of these. What did you do? And
a lot of them are not even curious. Uh,
the oncologist I I I wow, that's
unbelievable. I never saw anything like
this before. Uh don't you want to know?
No, no, no. Just keep doing what you're
doing.
>> Give me a break. You know, the whole
system needs to be uh re-evaluated.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's going to happen. I mean, we
have we're working on breast breast
cancer col on on pancreatic cancer
besides glyopblasto. So, we're going
right through the list and we're showing
that every one of these cancers, they
all have a very similar metabolic
problem. They can't they can't survive
without glucose and glutamine and they
can't transition to fatty acids and
ketone bodies. Regardless of what you
might read, we interrogated the damn
cells. They can't you take away glucose
and glutamine, they're not going to be
able to switch to any other fuel and
survive. I don't I don't give a damn
what anybody says. This is a
mitochondrial metabolic disease.
Absolutely a mitochondrial metabolic
disease which now opens a whole new
world of way to attack this problem. But
they're hanging on to that theory. We we
just read a paper not long ago where
they screened 200 million mutations uh
looking for the the the singular driver
that we've overlooked that's really
responsible for this and they didn't
find it. And rather than concluding that
you know we'll never find it. They said
the search must continue.
I mean I mean how I how I mean what do
you have how many how long you have to
beat this dead horse before you're not
not gonna get up and walk
because there millions and millions of
dollars invested in finding that driver
gene that no one's been able to find.
Right.
>> It does not exist. Get over it. It's the
mitochondria stupid.
So, professor, you've described that
you're still looking into the different
cancer types and applying your theories
to those cancer types to sort of bear
them out. Is there anything other than
that that's on your horizon for your lab
right now?
>> Well, we're trying to find glutamine
targeting drugs and neutralize any level
of toxicity. You you want to maintain
therapeutic efficacy uh without uh
collateral toxicity. So, if we can
figure out how to do that, we'll have an
all whole range of new drugs that we can
use to manage cancer. Uh, we just have
to figure out that and and all of our
research is is supported by philanthropy
and private foundations.
>> Um, and that and that drives what what
we do. And there are people out there
that just want to see this paradigm
change happen and they don't feel they
got to make a billion dollars on it. Um
and uh and what our research is doing is
uh again perfecting dosage timing and
scheduling of diet drug cocktails that
will ultimately be uh utilized in the
clinic. It's always good to know that
you've tried something in a pre-clinical
system before you try it on people for
the first time. It gives both the
patient and the caregiver some
confidence uh peace of mind that you're
not going to kill your patient. So um
you know so we've tested it and and
we've seen therapeutic success and and
therefore if you guys do it to some
level the similar way you should get the
same result.
>> Uh you have to realize when we do stuff
in mice the basil metabolic rate of our
experimental system is sevenfold faster
than that of a human. So we always have
to be uh cognizant of ba of differences
in basil metabolic rates. So think then
what humans do much better than these
mice because uh we can ask humans how
they feel and it takes a longer period
of time uh for seeing therapeutic
efficacy or toxicity whereas in the
mouse everything happens so much faster.
So um we're able to do that and how to
translate from the research bench to the
clinic is we're one of the few groups
that actually do this. There's a lot of
talk about doing it. We do it. We have
an army of clinicians out there that are
chomping at the bit and trying it on
these patients and they feed it back to
us and then we change we we strategize
with our pre-clinical systems. So, it's
a feed forward feedback uh system and
it's going to eventually solve this
cancer problem.
>> It's great.
>> Well, kudos to you and to your lab
associates and to those who keep you
guys funded for all the work that you're
doing. Uh we of course are going to
continue to follow the developments that
you publish with great interest and with
our appreciation.
>> Well, thank you very much. You guys are
doing your your fair share of pushing
this system as well.
>> Thank you. It's been a highlight of my
career to know you and to to visit with
you and I keep eagerly following your
work and keeping an eye on it. So
congratulations and look forward to even
greater levels of cooperation.
>> Oh, thank you very much, Ralph. It's
real pleasure.
>> Thank you.
>> And uh Ben, you enjoy yourself now. Have
a nice day.
>> All right. Thanks. For now, for the Moss
Report, I'm Ben Moss. How are you
healing today?
[Music]